I'm going to have to go back to the
first place.
I'm going to go back to the
What's deep inside here?
So, what's deep inside here?
So, what's the deep inside here?
I'm going to have to go back to the
workplace.
Okay, I'm out.
Okay, you're out.
Ed White is the first American to walk in space,
but he's not the first man.
A Russian was ten weeks earlier.
America's Cold War enemy has won every first of the space race.
Ever since the Russian satellite Sputnik,
the United States has been second best.
Now the two superpowers are locked in a titanic struggle for world leadership.
And the moon has become the ultimate battleground.
We felt we were in a war for technological supremacy and primacy in the world,
and we felt that the America had been challenged so badly
and so strongly by the Russians that we were in the hole.
I've often thought that the space program, the space race,
quote-unquote, really took the place of a war.
It wasn't a shooting battle, but to me,
it was every bit as important as the other battles that were shooting battles.
We had non-Corea.
The race to the moon is the adventure story of the century.
A tale of discovery and risk.
A hero's and sacrifice.
For the United States, it will become an eight-year obsession,
costing $25 billion and harnessing the labors of 400,000 American workers.
It is fueled by a booming economy,
and driven by the fear of falling behind a Cold War enemy.
But the final challenge comes from a dynamic leader who gambled
he could inspire his country to reach farther than anyone before.
Before this decade is out, a blending of man on the moon
and returning him safely to the Earth.
And in the end, an epic journey launched out of cold political necessity
has the most human of consequences, a greater understanding of ourselves.
The Earth from here is a great way to take that into space.
In the race to the moon, both sides have their champions.
The Soviet cosmonauts are the vanguard of a new Russian revolution,
heroes of the march to supremacy and space.
America's astronauts are treated more like movie stars than military test pilots.
They're the best of the best, and they know it.
You had to know you were good.
You had to believe in yourself.
You had to know by God when you made a decision.
You thought it was the right one.
It's not that you just took behind it, but you had to know you were good enough to make the right decision.
We get very clearly seen on rice.
The men who ride the rockets into space get the glory, but they take the risks.
And the race to the moon has plenty of both.
One of the things you got to remember about astronauts, they don't mind dying,
but what they can't stand is to screw up.
So they were always very, very focused on doing the job right,
and that was the first thing they focused on.
January 1967, America is about to discover the terrible risks of the race.
The Apollo program is getting underway, the series of missions that will shoot for the moon.
The first rides are going to veterans Gus Guisson, Ed White, and Rookie Roger Chaffey.
Their capsule is still playing with technical problems,
but NASA is moving quickly to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade.
The Apollo 1 launch is just over three weeks away.
At 6.31pm January 27, 1967,
Guisson, White, and Chaffey sit atop their rocket for what should be another routine test.
Roger Chaffey was over in the right-hand couch, Gus Grisson was over in the left side,
and Ed White was in the middle.
Suddenly there's a spark and a flashfire fueled by pure oxygen rips through the capsule.
Ed White's job was to reach up behind his head and try and undo because they were lying on their backs to try and undo this hatch.
But the hatch is a killer. There's a fatal design flaw. It takes 90 seconds to open.
The fire needs only 20 seconds to burn through the astronaut's oxygen hoses.
The fire is so intense, it ruptures the hull of the capsule.
For a lot of people it was very hard to think of astronauts dying not in space,
not in the course of a mission, not because the booster blows up, but on the pad where there are rescue workers on the other side of the hatch
and they can't do anything to save them.
I can remember being at the grave sign of Roger Chaffey who was my neighbor at the time.
And when that final load of taps sounded, I wondered whether that wasn't the death knoll for the entire Apollo program.
From this moment the Apollo 1 tragedy becomes known simply as the fire. NASA doesn't fly again for 18 months.
Astronaut Frank Bourman rallies the troops.
Frank had a way of putting things. We can't find any one person to blame for this thing. We're all to blame for it.
We knew what was going on. We just did not appreciate the danger and the risk that we were taking.
And we hadn't taken all the necessary precautions. So in a sense we were all guilty and probably we all carried a sense of that guilt.
NASA is still recovering from the fire when the Soviets are stopped in their tracks by their own disaster.
They lose their first cosmonaut when Vladimir Comarov's capsule hurtles into the ground at 400 miles per hour.
After his state funeral, the Soviets too put their space program on hold.
Night aside flies for a year and a half. Then suddenly, in the autumn of 1968, the race is back on.
The next big goal for both sides is to put men in orbit around the moon.
But Apollo's lunar module is still in the factory when the CIA drops a bombshell.
The intelligence agency believes the Soviets are planning to loop men around the moon.
NASA takes a gamble. Outdo the Russians by sending a manned flight to orbit the moon ahead of schedule, a more difficult task.
But NASA's own internal memos show it's worried another failure poses grave risks to the Apollo program.
There might also be what it calls undue crew risk.
It was a real sweaty decision. There were some people who were violently opposed to it.
But they finally all climbed on board and said, okay, you know, the equipment's here. We might as well give it a try.
The equipment is the Saturn V. It's a monster, but the only thing with enough brute force to propel Americans to the moon.
The Saturn V has been tested only twice on manned. Now the crew of Apollo 8 Jim Lovell, Bill Andersen, Frank Borman, will be the first to ride the monster.
10, 9. We have ignition sequence start.
The Saturn V is as powerful as a small atomic bomb and every bit as violent.
The engine's alive. The war.
And no one who rides this rocket will ever forget it.
They hear almost like a distant rumble of thunder. And they're the rumbling kind of swells.
And now it's more of a roar. And it begins to penetrate even the walls of the spacecraft and their helmets.
And then finally this thing gives a kind of a jolt and then leaves the earth.
And with the thunder of the world's mightiest rocket, the race for the moon is on with a vengeance.
The Saturn V is the first to ride the monster.
We have commit. We have looked off. We have looked off at 7.51 AM.
America's hopes to be first to the moon are riding on the monster Saturn V.
And for the crew of Apollo 8, it's the ride of a lifetime.
And up in the command module, these guys are being thrown around in their seats against their straps.
It was so violent that Bill Anders thought, you know, my God, we must have caught a fin of the rocket on the tower and we're going to come down in a second.
I had the sensation that maybe I was in the midst of a living thing.
The gurgling and the shaking and it was an experience as if you were an element of a living machine.
As it climbed, you could see it really peddling hard.
And you could see it start to pick up momentum as it burned off tons and tons of fuel every second.
It gave you the impression that this was a machine on its way to someplace.
That someplace is the moon's orbit.
A 25,000 miles per hour, the Saturn V finally generates an upspeed to burst free of Earth's gravity.
It is December 1968.
The Apollo 8 gives you a open stage.
Borman, Lovell and Anders are the first spacemen, the first to leave Earth orbit and dive into deep space.
But while others may be moved to poetry to Apollo 8's commander, it's just a job.
Apollo 8 was a great adventure, but it was also hard work.
I've never been romantically inclined about space travel.
Star Trek, I've never seen that doesn't at all interest me.
I know I was going on an important mission and I wanted to do it right.
Borman is all business with no time for excess baggage.
It was hard enough to think about going to the moon and coming back.
Don't complicate things with things like TV camera.
I mean, he didn't want the TV camera because he thought it was going to be a bother.
But Borman's been overruled and the Earth sees itself from afar for the first time.
From a camera that nearly didn't make the ride.
And you're all looking at your stars that seem from 108,000 miles out of space.
They are black and white and fuzzy, but the power of these images is irresistible.
We really did see it in a new way.
Lots of people look at those images and they say,
Kali, it really is this tiny little blue-green ball that's out there.
White clouds on it and it looks different from anything else we've seen.
And it's just hanging there in this blackness.
Mike, what I keep imagining is it's not about some lonely travel or from another planet.
What I think about the Earth is from this altitude.
Whether I think it be an avid or not.
On Christmas Eve, Apollo 8 orbits the moon 10 times.
The moon is a different thing to each one of us.
I know my own impression is that it's a bad, only, for a big time, existence or a span of nothing.
The voyage makes poets of them all.
But it's not the moon that finally catches Frank Borman's heart and eye.
It is the home of everything he holds dear and it fills him with wonder.
Ah, ah, that's what it was.
At that point, I think we were all aware that this was a historic moment.
And then it was, okay, now let's go home.
That didn't last too long because we had a lot of work to do then in prep break.
This came at a node between getting there and doing the work and then getting prepared for the trip.
And then the moon came back to the home.
And God said, let there be light and there was light.
And God saw the light.
They were good and God divided the light from the darkness.
I think Frank Borman came up with some wonderful eloquent stuff during that television show when they read from Genesis.
And from the true Apollo 8, we close with good night, good luck, a great night.
Merry Christmas and God bless all of you, all of you on the good earth.
All of you on the good earth.
Just to this day I get chills thinking about that. It's a beautiful thing.
America's gamble pays off.
NASA has won the first big heat in the race to the moon.
But the final and most dangerous challenge is still ahead.
When we got Apollo 8 out there, the Russians knew they had had it.
It was that simple. But they knew that a landing was not going to be very far away.
So yeah, I think Apollo 8 kind of put the nail in the coffin.
But the Russians aren't dead yet.
And what the Americans don't know is that Moscow still has an ace up its sleeve.
This is a adventure in the first half of 19-feet and west Texas there is a running competition which has won the post-19 bar 3 out of 16.
The crash while overcrowded.
bold challenge. Five Apollo missions are scheduled. The workhorse, the Saturn 5, has never been
pushed so hard, and the monster is delivering flawlessly.
They were just pumping out Saturn 5, like there was no tomorrow. I mean, there was a new
launch every couple of months.
But the Soviets are far from quitting. A U.S. spy satellite snatches top secret photos
of a giant new Soviet rocket, the N1. The evidence indicates the Russians may finally
be aiming a manned moon shop themselves.
It looked to have the same size, it looked to have the same capability that the Saturn
5 would have. It was a moon rocket. What they didn't know was that the Soviets were
having enormous problems with it.
Every time they tried to launch that N1, it blew up on them. Seconds into the launch.
They just exploded.
Roger, here's from the Apollo 10. You can tell the world that we have arrived.
May 1969, Apollo 10. The dress rehearsal for the moon landing. Eugene, Surnin, and Tom
Stafford will do everything but touch down, buzzing the moon's surface closer than anyone
before. I mean, when we came down, we were screaming across that surface. And we were
47,000 feet above the, quote, sea level part of the surface, but we had tried gigantic
mountains tired enough.
Well, here's to Houston. This is Souti.
Right, go ahead.
It's going. We are down among them, Charlie.
And I said more, we are down among them. I don't know what happened to my English language
when I got to the moon, but it changed. I don't know if it's something in me. But, well,
I just felt like when we were coming down over this mountain, we had to pick up our feet
because we were going to just, you know, we're going to drag the landing gear, the lunar
mongrel over top of some of those mountains. We were so close.
The sea of tranquility, which men have eyed for centuries. The Apollo 10 crew seized
it in more detail than Galileo ever dreamed. It is here. The first landing will be attempted
in just eight weeks.
The Apollo 10 looks much smoother than from the Orbit or Photo Show. It's still up to
make 25 to 30 percent. It's a semi-clear area.
Sun and the Stafford are just here to survey, but they're so close they can almost make
history themselves.
Knowing that it was Sun and Tom Stafford, two wild men, in charge at that point, there's
a lot of us that were kind of thinking, you know, I wonder if they really will. And it
would not have been surprised to see them say, oh, what the heck, you know, but they
were truly, they were outfitted for a landing.
OK, Jonathan, what's wrong with you?
But the thought runs through you, Gene Sternen's mind, given the chance he and Stafford could
have been first to make the giant step.
You know, head we head fuel, we could have gone down and we could have landed. And we
would have done it successfully. We'll ever know now, but I still think we could have.
That new beacon, you're looking OK for the instruction bar.
And suddenly, without warning, the lunar module lurches out of control. And Sternen nearly
gets his wish to be first on the moon.
Here we are, all of a sudden, my world changed. I'm looking at this fantastic science fiction
world, and then all of a sudden, we're in chaos.
All of a sudden, the whole thing started gyrating wildly. I mean, Gene Sternen looked
out the window and saw the moon's horizon just tilt, you know, rapidly and start to swing
like he was on some kind of a carnival ride.
Tell me, Brown, Houston, they got safe. They had a wild, a gyration, you know, but they
got safe.
I find myself, they got spacecrafted, we're only in the spin and in all of a sudden, we
got an under control and got our breath. I find out later, much later, that from what
I understand, we were two or three seconds away from it, that continued to eventually crash
in on the moon.
It's one more reminder of the risks of trying to land men on the moon.
July 1969. NASA is ready to take the final step. Apollo 11 will try for a landing. Neil Armstrong,
Michael Collins and Buzz Aldrin have sweated every detail from deploying experiments to scooping
lunar soil. Armstrong is the commander. Everyone agrees there are none better.
This was a cool guy and he had a reputation for being such an extremely skilled pilot
who would keep his cool in very bad situations.
Armstrong showed it when he narrowly cheated death during a test in the lunar landing research
vehicle.
He had to eject out of that at one point because the machine started to head badly and had
he stayed with it, he would probably have been killed. So he had the ability to know
when a situation was getting out of hand and he got out of there.
Armstrong is not only good, he's lucky. 13 days before Apollo 11 is to lift off, his
competitions suffers a mortal blow. The Soviets launch another N1 rocket and again it explodes.
But this time the spy photos show the blast has completely destroyed the N1 launch pad.
They had hopes of being able to scoop the US one more time. They weren't able to make
that N1 work and ultimately that was the downfall of their moon program.
The Soviets might be out of the race but they can still play the spoiler and they're
secretly planning a last ditch end run as Armstrong, Aldrin and Collins prepare to fly.
July 16th 1969, a day eight years in the making. 300 feet above the ground in the so-called
white room at the top of the launch tower. Technicians are easing Neil Armstrong and
Michael Collins into the Apollo 11 capsule. Buzz Aldrin is outside on the gantry alone
with the towering Saturn V. The white room was up above me. I got off the elevator because
they don't want too many people waiting around while they put in first one crewman then the other.
The sun is just coming up and the peaceful waves are coming in. And I knew that this was a moment
that I wanted to savor in some way and retell about because it was a moment of serenity.
What did I know about what was going to happen in the next several days? But here it was
and I thought this is the moment I just want to remember.
In mission control the tension rises. Everyone feels the pressure to do well to be at the top of
their form and in the last minutes before launch each man finds his own way to weather the countdown.
For me it's a little bit of our father time. I mean I kind of realized we're going to light
something off. It's pretty explosive. So I always take a moment to say a little prayer.
Many of the flight controllers hold the power of a newborn or a go at any time.
Many are hot shots in their 20s and 30s as arrogant and confident in their own abilities as the
astronauts. They don't mind being out on the end of the diving board alone with nobody else.
They'll make a decision and if they don't know how to do that they won't last.
5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0 all engine run. Ripped off. We have a lift off.
32 minutes past the hour. Ripped off in Apollo 11.
Astronaut Michael Collins thinks they have only a 50-50 chance of succeeding.
And on the flight to the moon the astronauts have written out of the flight plan anything that
might be a distraction. They want to concentrate on what's ahead.
We didn't really want to have distractions that were not contributing directly to the mission
success which was a safe landing on the moon. A confidence that we knew what we were doing when
we got there and on a safe departure. So there was a lot of time to just look out the window.
But already circling the moon is Russia's last ditch ploy. An unmanned Soviet probe launched three
days earlier to steal the glory of Apollo 11. Where do you people know that Apollo 11 astronauts were
racing Russian robot to the moon? Luna 15's mission is to scoop 100 grams of lunar soil,
then get back to Earth first. It's a preemptive strike that just might work.
It would fly faster than Apollo 11. That's why the soil would be delivered approximately one day
earlier than the Apollo 11 return to Earth. Then the Soviets could claim their robot accomplished
what America needed three men to do. But for now Washington doesn't know Luna 15's purpose
or orbit. So it takes an unusual step. It asks the Russians for details and gets an answer.
Americans were very much concerned about this robot and they even issued the request to the Soviet
government to ensure that Luna 15 would not hit Apollo 11. And Russian government even responded
that there's no danger and the robot is under control.
The next morning the eagle separates from Colombia and prepares for a landing.
Neil Armstrong's focused like never before in his flying career.
Eagle looking great, your go. And your whole concentration is on finding a place to land,
a safe place to land. So if your Neil Armstrong in those last minutes, as soon as that lunar
module pitches forward and begins the final descent, you are looking at the place where you're heading
to see where the computer is taking you. Then at 33,000 feet there's a mission threatening alarm.
And about that time why we we get a program alarm this interrupts our train. We know why you
bothering me. Nothing's going wrong and yet you're flashing a program alarm and we don't understand.
Mission control can see the eagle's computer is overloading. The 1202 alarm sends a
adrenaline surging and a young controller out on the end of the diving board must make the
decision of his life in seconds. Right here we got we're going at alarm. You go to continue to
continue to keep the altitude now 21,000 feet still looking very good. Then at 16,000 feet,
the computer shuts down again another alarm. I think there was a sense that if they didn't come too
often, whatever too often meant I'm not sure. But if they didn't come too often, it was probably okay
as long as everything else looked okay. Good radar data. We're now in the approach phase. Everything
looking good. The eagle's close but it hasn't landed yet. And privately, a large percentage of the
engineers back in Houston thought along the first attempt they would do that. That there would be an
abort and probably number 12 or number 13 would be the ones that actually made the landing. That didn't
happen because of the guy who was on the stick. altitude 42, how do you think you're going for landing over?
I'm going to have to land up for landing 3000 feet. Now just a half a mile above the moon's surface,
meal Armstrong has his hands full. Beside him Buzz Aldrin's eyes are glued to the computer screen,
altitude rate of descent, forward movement. He's rattling off the numbers that Armstrong needs to
land the eagle. Then there's another alarm. It's the last thing they need so close to the surface.
Your attention is diverted by these alarms that could threaten the whole landing.
And then once they tell you you can keep going, you look out the window again and my god there is a
crater the size of a football field and it's got boulders around it that are as big as small cars.
And this is the place where the computer is steering you for a landing.
So the proven thing to do is to smoothly fly over that but that's also the thing that prolongs
the mission but that consumes more fuel. Quickly Armstrong makes up his mind.
He looked at his fuel he says I've got that distance to fly. I can fly this like a helicopter
and I can go over there and put it down instead of here in the spiral rocks and that was all
that was on Neil Armstrong's mind. But now the eagle has only 60 seconds of fuel.
And you know it was getting a little close when 60 seconds was called out and the light came on
and then we're still 100 feet off the surface.
When we had 30 seconds and we're still I guess maybe 10, 15 feet. I felt we had it made then
and it eased down. I could see the shadow and the dust coming up.
We're picking up some dust. We're picking up some dust.
And when he said that it hit me that my god there blowing dust off the moon.
And so for the first time it had a realness to it.
On that light.
Okay engine stop. Copy it down Eagle.
Listen, uh, tangoity base here. The Eagle has landed.
Rocket twink, tranquility. We copy on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about the turn blue.
We're breathing again. Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
And they landed with something like 20 seconds on the gauges which seems almost you know impossible
but it can you know to a test pilot 20 seconds is a long time.
We flew it in. We flew it in. God bless them.
There is a hill in view.
It has taken America eight long years and the pride shows in the astronaut snapshots.
But now the world waits while Armstrong and Aldrin make sure they can leave quickly if there's
an emergency. The weight is six and a half agonizing hours.
And it was very disconcerting. I think to everybody back on Earth that it did take us so long
but we felt it was so important to be very deliberate about all the steps that we were taking.
And one of the things that I want to put into the flight plan as soon as we touched down
I wanted to go through the rehearsal for liftoff two hours later.
Finally.
Roger Neil.
Hey we're getting a fixture on the TV.
And currently it's upside down on monitor but we can make out for him on a detail.
Okay Neil we can see you're coming down the ladder now.
600 million people are watching on TV around the world.
I'm gonna step off the lam now.
That's one small step for man.
One giant leap for man.
14 minutes later Buzz Aldrin steps out and groups for his own first words on the moon.
It is magnificent desolation.
Beautiful view.
Is that something?
Exdeficient desolation.
It was not my assignment to come up with a clever meaningful pronouncement upon my reaching the surface.
But that's something that impressed upon me at the time the magnificence of the achievement that we
were a part of but what a desolate world we were visiting.
I'm strong and Aldrin have just enough time two hours to plant a flag, dedicate a plaque.
And speak to a president.
And while they rest the Soviets make their move but something goes wrong very wrong.
Russia's desperate attempt to scoop lunar soil and get it back to earth first fails abruptly.
According to the schedule lunar 15 was supposed to land a day later after Apollo 11.
But it crashed on the moon.
The crash kills the Soviets last chance to steal Apollo 11's thunder.
There are guidance recommendations.
Is things your cleared for takeoff?
Roger understand. We're number one on the runway.
Roger.
That was beautiful.
When he takes 36 feet, he's just acting up.
I'm gonna take the over.
Very smooth.
After Apollo 11 everything seems possible.
NASA plans nine more moon missions and then a shot of landing a man on Mars.
As America celebrates the safe return of its first moonwalkers, one space warrior knows the battle is done.
Final analysis at that point I knew that a very significant battle in the cold war had been won.
I lost an awful lot of France in Korea.
You can argue that we didn't win that one and we won this one.
Okay, battle has to go.
Looks good here.
Flight good agreement.
But in the end Apollo 11 will be a symbol of far more than a cold war triumph.
It's going on.
Yeah really?
Flight.
Roger.
The significance is not really in the rocks that we brought back.
It wasn't the significance of what anybody really said, the poetic, whatever.
It was that so many people's lives were affected and when they think about they say,
I don't remember where I was when that happened.
Why?
Because it had an impact on their lives.
It had a positive impact.
And that really, to me, is a human spiritual value of that.
It's a human value totally.
I still have an amazing feeling when I go out and look at the moon come up and think about the fact that
all of this really happened and that it happened in my lifetime and I was there to see it.
I think all of us who were alive when Apollo
happened are really lucky to have those memories.
All of the spectacular, just spectacular.
Wow.
Very true, beautiful.
I got a deep love in the rocks.
That's great.
By the early 1970s, astronauts are frolicing on the moon.
But who could imagine that America's fascination with exploring space would fade so quickly?
Washington is faced with a host of earthbound troubles and it starts lopping NASA's missions.
The pressures of the Vietnam War were there and the politicians had the sense that,
well, we've done it now.
What?
Here we'd landed on the moon.
We'd done something that people had dreamt about for, you know, hundreds if not thousands of years.
And by the second time it happens, people are already starting to get jaded.
April 1970.
Less than a year after the first moon landing, Apollo doesn't even rate live TV coverage.
Jim Lovell, Jack Swaggerton, Fred Hayes, the crew of Apollo 13 are just another forgettable mission.
At first.
Here's what we've had about.
205,000 miles from home and explosion cripples Apollo 13 and swiftly focuses attention again on the moon missions.
Okay, now that's everybody keep cool.
We got a limestone attach.
A young Glenn Loney is one of the flight directors on Apollo 13.
We think we have the situation in control.
We project the...
This terrible sinking feeling, you know, like I'd been kicked in the stomach that, wow, we've got ourselves a difficult thing here.
Mission control faces its most challenging task ever, a space rescue.
It has to bring back three men alive, losing a crew in space now would surely cancel the remaining Apollo missions.
Houston finds a way to bring the crew back a day early.
But to do so, Apollo 13 will have to fire its engine briefly to align itself with Earth.
If the capsule isn't pointed in the right direction, the crew will skip off the Earth's atmosphere.
So mission control tells the crew to take a sighting on an object it can't miss.
If they were accurate, if the navigation system was accurate, they'd see the sun right in the crosshairs.
And, you know, if it wasn't accurate, they were in big trouble because that meant that they had no way of aligning their navigation system to make the rocket firing to get them home.
A young Jerry Griffin is on duty.
He's listening and he hears Jim Lovell say, what have you got? What do you see, Fred?
And Fred says, I've got the upper right corner of the sun and Lovell says, we've got it.
Lovell says, I've got it. He yelled it essentially on the, I've got it.
And I was trying to keep notes in the flight director log.
And when I went back here, or even weeks later and looked at it, I could not read my writing.
My hand, I was so excited.
His hand was shaking from the tension so badly that he could barely read his own writing.
The drama had recaptured the world's attention.
But when it's over, the Apollo missions fade from sight once more.
Two and a half years later, December 1972, Eugene Surnin is a top of Saturn 5 again.
It's getting off the top and it's lighting up the areas.
It's just like daylight here at Kennedy Space Center.
The Saturn 5 is moving off the pad.
It is now clear of the tower.
Turn off the plate.
The sun is setting on the Apollo program.
This will be America's last trip to the moon.
38 degrees.
Dallanjee, I go over.
But this time, the man who blaze the trail for Apollo 11 and stopped short makes it all the way down.
OK, then by perpetual verse or week coming in.
Picture is proceeded.
And there it is, here's the nurse Camelock.
Why?
I'll target.
I see it.
Dallanjee, I go for landing.
Ten feet.
That contact.
Yes, then you can tell America that Challenger is a torseless role.
I should challenge her that's a super.
Finally, Eugene Surnin is on the moon and at peace.
And you've never known silence.
Requirements are stillness in your entire life.
And there are the dust stops, the noise stops, the movement stops.
And to remind you of what it's all about is the earth surrounded by blackness.
Overpowering three dimensional blackness.
A blackness that I call the infinity of time and the infinity of space.
And I don't know what that means.
I can't show it to you, but I know it exists because I saw it with my own eyes.
So, that coming.
Jack Schmidt having a few problems.
Astronaut Jack Schmidt, a geologist and Surnin,
spend three days on the surface, longer than any other mission.
And at a crater named Shorty, they make the biggest scientific discovery of the entire Apollo program.
Oh, hey, there is orange soil.
Well, don't move it, Dallanjee.
It's all over.
Orange.
Dallanjee, do I see it?
I've started up with my feet.
Hey, it is.
I can see it from here.
It's orange.
And then when he found the orange soil, I said,
uh, first time I saw it, I thought, oh my god, Jack's been here too long.
You know, he's going to find something.
And I went over to look at it and by god, it was orange.
I couldn't believe it.
It truly was orange.
And it was only literally the only color other than shades of gray.
We found it in the surface moon.
And I don't think anyone expected us to find it at all.
The orange soil is evidence of ancient lava flow
for little time left.
We like to leave it immediately.
My godly, this time goes fast.
It is an experience like none other.
You're there.
You're happy to be there.
And you know, you got to have fun.
One thing I told Ron Evans and Jack's man,
I said, you're only going to come this way one time and enjoy it.
Don't miss a thing.
Just in...
Then it's over.
Eugene Surnin has known for a long time that his will be the last footprints on the moon.
When I took those last steps, I wanted someone to recognize the significance,
the importance of man having walked on the moon during the 20th century.
I'd like to just let what I believe history will report that American challenge up today
has forced man's destiny up tomorrow.
I felt the challenge that we accepted
and what we had accomplished there are no short few years that we now call the Apollo years.
Truly has opened the door of the future.
Truly has told mankind we can...
we need to go further. We need to do more.
Apollo 17 writes the last chapter in the Great Adventure.
I do think history will look back and say, my gosh, those folks did that back in the mid-1900s
essentially. Did that in the mid-1900s and then didn't do anything to follow up on it,
maybe for another hundred years.
And that's going to be kind of an over.
Why?
Four, three, two, one,
zero, we have oothed recognition and liftoff of the spatial discovery as NASA.
Today the shuttle keeps a man presence in space, though at an earth hugging altitude of 350 miles.
Mars is what counts now. And humans could land there as early as the year 2012,
maybe 2019, says NASA. But nothing is carved in stone.
I think the question of human destiny is an important one here,
and whether or not we become a galactic people as opposed to an earth bound people.
But when a decision is made to explore deep space again,
man will follow in the footsteps of some lucky man, some very lucky man,
the first to look back from the moon, to a fragile planet they called home.
They look at a photograph with somebody interviews them and they're reminded of an extraordinary
thing that they were lucky enough to be part of, and a place in history and an experience that's
literally unique in all of humanity. Their experience will always be unique.
There will never again be another group of people who were first to go to another world.
God shit, was it? I feel so lucky to have been there. I feel so fortunate to have participated.